---
title: Equality is Hard
tags: types
---

Equality seems like one of the simplest things to talk about in a
theorem prover. After all, the notion of equality is something any
small child can intuitively grasp. The sad bit is, while it's quite
easy to hand-wave about, how equality is formalized seems to be a
rather complex topic.

In this post I'm going to attempt to cover a few of the main different
means of "equality proofs" or identity types and the surrounding
concepts. I'm opting for a slightly more informal approach in the
hopes of covering more ground.

## Definitional Equality

This is not really an equality type per say, but it's worth stating
explicitly what definitional equality is since I must refer to it
several times throughout this post.

Two terms `A` and `B` are definitional equal is a judgment notated

    Γ ⊢ A ≡ B

This is *not* a user level proof but rather a primitive, untyped judgment in
the meta-theory of the language itself. The typing rules of the
language will likely include a rule along the lines of

    Γ ⊢ A ≡ B, Γ ⊢ x : A
    ————————————————————–
         Γ ⊢ x : B

So this isn't an identity type you would prove something with, but a
much more magical notion that two things are completely the same to
the typechecker.

Now in most type theories we have a slightly more powerful notion of
definitional equality where not only are `x ≡ y` if `x` is `y` only by
definition but also by computation.

So in Coq for example

    (2 + 2) ≡ 4

Even though "definitionally" these are entirely separate
entities. In most theories, definitionally equal means "inlining all
definitions and with normalization", but not all.

In type theories that distinguish between the two, the judgment that
when normalized `x` is `y` is called judgmental equality. I won't
distinguish between the two further because most don't, but it's worth
noting that they can be seen as separate concepts.

## Propositional Equality

This is the sort of equality that we'll spend the rest of our time
discussing. Propositional equality is a particular type constructor with
the type/kind

    Id : (A : Set) → A → A → Type

We should be able to prove a number of definitions like

    reflexivity  : (A : Set)(x     : A) → Id x x
    symmetry     : (A : Set)(x y   : A) → Id x y → Id y x
    transitivity : (A : Set)(x y z : A) → Id x y → Id y z → Id x z

This is an entirely separate issue from definitional equality since
propositional equality is a concept that users can hypothesis about.

One very important difference is that we can make proofs like

    sanity : Id 1 2 → ⊥

Since the identity proposition is a type family which can be used just
like any other proposition. This is in stark contrast to definitional
equality which a user can't even normally utter!

## Intensional

This is arguably the simplest form of equality. Identity types are
just normal inductive types with normal induction principles. The most
common is equality given by Martin Lof

    data Id (A : Set) : A → A → Type where
       Refl : (x : A) → Id x x

This yields a simple induction principle

    id-ind : (P : (x y : A) → Id x y → Type)
           → ((x : A) → P x x (Refl x))
           → (x y : A)(p : Id x y) → P x y p

In other words, if we can prove that `P` holds for the reflexivity
case, than `P` holds for any `x` and `y` where `Id x y`.

We can actually phrase `Id` in a number of ways, including

    data Id (A : Set)(x : A) : A → Set where
      Refl : Id x x

This really makes a difference in the resulting induction principle

    j : (A : Set)(x : A)(P : (y : A) → Id x y → Set)
      → P x Refl
      → (y : A)(p : Id x y) → P y p

This clearly turned out a bit differently! In particular now `P` is
only parametrized over *one* value of `A`, `y`. This particular
elimination is traditionally named `j`.

These alternative phrasings can have serious impacts on proofs that
use them. It also has even more subtle effects on things like
heterogeneous equality which we'll discuss later.

The fact that this only relies on simple inductive principles is also
a win for typechecking. Equality/substitution fall straight out of how
normal inductive types are handled! This also means that we can keep
decidability within reason.

The price we pay of course is that this is much more painful to work
with. An intensional identity type means the burden of constructing
our equality proofs falls on users. Furthermore, we lose the ability
to talk about observational equality.

Observational equality is the idea that two "thingies" are
indistinguishable by any test.

It's clear that we can prove that if `Id x y`, then `f x = f y`, but
it's less clear how to go the other way and prove something like

    fun_ext : (A B : Set)(f g : A → B)
             → ((x : A) → Id (f x) (g x)) → Id f g
    fun_ext f g p = ??

Even though this is clearly desirable. If we know that `f` and `g`
behave exactly the same way, we'd like our equality to be able to
state that. However, we don't know that `f` and `g` are *constructed*
the same way, making this impossible to prove.

This can be introduced as an axiom but to maintain our inductively
defined equality type we have to sacrifice one of the
following

 1. Coherence
 2. Inductive types
 3. Extensionality
 4. Decidability

Some this has been avoided by regarding equality as an induction over
the *class* of types as in Martin Lof's intuitionist type theory.

In the type theory that we've outlined, this isn't expressible sadly.

## Definitional + Extensional

Some type theories go a different route to equality, giving us back
the extensionality in the process. One of those type theories is
extensional type theory.

In the simplest formulation, we have intensional type theory with a
new rule, reflection

    Γ ⊢ p : Id x y
    ——————————–————
      Γ ⊢ x ≡ y

This means that our normal propositional equality can be shoved *back*
into the more magical definitional equality. This gives us a lot more
power, all the typecheckers magic and support of definitional equality
can be used with our equality types!

It isn't all puppies an kittens though, arbitrary reflection can also
make things undecidable in general. For example Martin Lof's system is
undecidable in with extensional equality.

It's worth noting that no extensional type theory is implemented this
way. Instead they've taken a different approach to defining types
themselves!

In this model of ETT types are regarded as a partial equivalence
relation (PER) over unityped (untyped if you want to get in a
flamewar) lambda calculus terms.

These PERs precisely reflect the extensional equality at that "type"
and we then check membership by reflexivity. So `a : T` is synonymous
with `(a, a) ∈ T`. Notice that since we are dealing with a PER, we
know that `∀ a. (a, a) ∈ T` need not hold. This is reassuring,
otherwise we'd be able to prove that every type was inhabited by every
term!

The actual NuRPL&friends theory is a little more complicated than
that. It's not entirely dependent on PERs and allows a few different
ways of introducing types, but I find that PERs are a helpful idea.

## Propositional Extensionality
This is another flavor of extensional type theory which is really just
intensional type theory plus some axioms.

We can arrive at this type theory in a number of ways, the simplest is
to add axiom K

    k : (A : Set)(x : A)(P : (x : A) → Id x x → Type)
      → P x (Refl x) → (p : Id x x) → P x p

This says that if we can prove that for any property `P`,
`P x (Refl x)` holds, then it holds for any proof that `Id x x`. This
is subtly different than straightforward induction on `Id` because
here we're not proving that a property parameterized over two
different values of `A`, but only one.

This is horribly inconsistent in something like homotopy type theory
but lends a bit of convenience to theories where we don't give `Id` as
much meaning.

Using `k` we can prove that for any `p q : Id x y`, then `Id p q`.
In Agda notation

``` agda
    prop : (A : Set)(x y : A)(p q : x ≡ y)
         → p ≡ q
    prop A x .x refl q = k A P (λ _ → refl) x q
      where P : (x : A) → x ≡ x → Set
            P _ p = refl ≡ p
```

This can be further refined to show that that we can eliminate all
proofs that `Id x x` are `Refl x`

``` agda
    rec : (A : Set)(P : A → Set)(x y : A)(p : P x) → x ≡ y → P y
    rec A P x .x p refl = p

    rec-refl-is-useless : (A : Set)(P : A → Set)(x : A)
                        → (p : P x)(eq : x ≡ x) → p ≡ rec A P x x p eq
    rec-refl-is-useless A P x p eq with prop A x x eq refl
    rec-refl-is-useless A P x p .refl | refl = refl
```

This form of extensional type theory still leaves a clear distinction
between propositional equality and definitional equality by avoiding a
reflection rule. However, with `rec-refl-is–useless` we can do much of
the same things, whenever we have something that matches on an
equality proof we can just remove it.

We essentially have normal propositional equality, but with the
knowledge that things can only be equal in 1 way, up
to propositional equality!

## Heterogeneous Equality

The next form of equality we'll talk about is slightly different than
previous ones. Heterogeneous equality is designed to co-exist in some
other type theory and supplement the existing form of equality.

Heterogeneous equality is most commonly defined with John Major
equality

``` agda
    data JMeq : (A B : Set) → A → B → Set where
      JMrefl : (A : Set)(x : A) → JMeq A A x x
```

This is termed after a British politician since while it promises that
any two terms can be equal regardless of their class (type), only two
things from the same class can ever be equal.

Now remember how earlier I'd mentioned that how we phrase these
inductive equality types can have a huge impact? We'll here we can see
that because the above definition doesn't typecheck in Agda!

That's because Agda is predicative, meaning that a type constructor
can't quantify over the same universe it occupies. We can however,
cleverly phrase `JMeq` so to avoid this

``` agda
    data JMeq (A : Set) : (B : Set) → A → B → Set where
      JMrefl : (a : A) → JMeq A A a a
```

Now the constructor avoids quantifying over `Set` and therefore fits
inside the same universe as `A` and `B`.

`JMeq` is usually paired with an axiom to reflect heterogeneous
equality back into our normal equality proof.

    reflect : (A : Set)(x y : A) → JMeq x y → Id x y

This reflection doesn't look necessary, but arises for similar reasons
that dictate that `k` is unprovable.

It looks like this heterogeneous equality is a lot more trouble than
it's worth at first. It really shines when we're working with terms
that we *know* must be the same, but require pattern matching or other
jiggering to prove.

If you're looking for a concrete example, look no further than
[Observational Equality Now!](https://synrc.com/publications/cat/Temp/Logic/Observational.pdf). This
paper gives allows observational equality to be jammed into a
principally intensional system!

## Wrap Up

So this has been a whirlwind tour through a lot of different type
theories. I partially wrote this to gather some of this information in
one (free) place. If there's something here missing that you'd like to
see added, feel free to comment or email me.

*Thanks to Jon Sterling for proof reading and many subtle corrections :)*
